Independent Reading
Grade 6
Students entering grade 6 are expected to read at least two independent reading books. Students are
encouraged to choose from the suggested titles on the pages that follow. In the event that a student
wishes to make an alternate selection, we ask that families take an active role in helping students select
an appropriate independent reading title.
For other suggestions, please check out YALSA’s book awards and book lists for a selection of award-
winning titles.
Note: Students will discuss their independent reading selections in September—There is no written
requirement.
🎯 	Challenging Read
😀 	Recommended for the Reluctant Reader
Please Note:
Many books on our independent reading list are
available as eBooks through FollettShelf or the Sora
app. Titles with an active hyperlink are available as
eBooks. Students should use their school username
and password to access the site.
Contact bbarthelmes@byramhills.org with any
questions about using eBooks.
Quantities are limited

-- 1 of 12 --

Independent Reading
Grade 6
Adventure
City Spies 	James Ponti
Operating out of a base in Scotland, the City Spies are five kids
from various parts of the world. When they’re not attending the
local boarding school, they’re honing their unique skills, such as
sleight of hand, breaking and entering, observation, and
explosives. All of these allow them to go places in the world of
espionage where adults can’t.
Hatchet 	Gary Paulsen
After a plane crash, thirteen-year-old Brian spends fifty-four
days in the wilderness, learning to survive initially with only the
aid of a hatchet given him by his mother, and learning also to
survive his parents' divorce. (Audiobook available)
Holes 	Louis Sachar
As further evidence of his family's bad fortune which they
attribute to a curse on a distant relative, Stanley Yelnats is sent
to a hellish correctional camp in the Texas desert where he
finds his first real friend, a treasure, and a new sense of
himself. (Audiobook available)
Hoot 	Carl Hiaasen
Roy, who is new to his small Florida community, becomes
involved in another boy's attempt to save a colony of burrowing
owls from a proposed construction site. (Audiobook available)
Island of the
Blue Dolphins
🎯
Scott O’Dell
Left alone on a beautiful but isolated island off the coast of
California, a young Indian girl spends eighteen years, not only
merely surviving through her enormous courage and self-
reliance, but also finding a measure of happiness in her solitary
life. (Audiobook available)
Scat 	Carl Hiaasen
Nick and his friend Marta decide to investigate when a
mysterious fire starts near a Florida wildlife preserve and an
unpopular teacher goes missing.
🎯 	Challenging Read
😀 	Recommended for the Reluctant Reader

-- 2 of 12 --

Independent Reading
Grade 6
Stormbreaker
or any book in
The Alex Rider
Series
Anthony
Horowitz
Stormbreaker: After the death of the uncle who had been his
guardian, fourteen-year-old Alex Rider is coerced to continue
his uncle's dangerous work for Britain's intelligence agency,
MI6. (Audiobook available). Other titles in the series include:
Point Blank
Eagle Strike
Scorpia
Ark Angel
Snakehead
Crocodile Tears
Scorpia Rising
Russian Roulette
Skeleton Key
Adventure
Realistic Fiction
A Mango-
Shaped Space Wendy Mass
Afraid that she is crazy, thirteen-year-old Mia, who sees a
special color with every letter, number, and sound, keeps this a
secret until she becomes overwhelmed by school, changing
relationships, and the loss of something important to her.
Ali Cross James
Patterson
James Patterson's blockbuster Alex Cross series has sold over
100 million copies—and now he's bringing those thrills to a new
generation! Alex's son Ali is eager to follow in his father's
footsteps as a detective, but when his best friend goes missing,
what price will he have to pay to solve the mystery?
Augie & Me 	R.J. Palacio
Millions of readers have fallen in love with Auggie Pullman, an
ordinary boy with an extraordinary face. Wonder tells his story
from six different perspectives, but there were some characters
whose unique perspectives were not shared—until now.
Because of Mr.
Terupt
😀
Rob Buyea
Seven fifth-graders at Snow Hill School in Connecticut relate
how their lives are changed for the better by "rookie teacher"
Mr. Terupt.
This title is the first book in a series.
🎯 	Challenging Read
😀 	Recommended for the Reluctant Reader

-- 3 of 12 --

Independent Reading
Grade 6
Blended Sharon M.
Draper
Eleven-year-old Isabella’s parents are divorced, so she has to
switch lives every week: One week she’s Isabella with her dad,
his girlfriend Anastasia, and her son Darren living in a fancy
house where they are one of the only black families in the
neighborhood. The next week she’s Izzy with her mom and her
boyfriend John-Mark in a small, not-so-fancy house that she
loves.
The Cat Ate My
Gymsuit
😀
Paula
Danziger
Marcy Lewis has a lot to deal with--a clinging mother, an angry
father, a lousy school situation, and the inescapable fact that
she is fat. But when Mrs. Barbara Finney arrives to take over
Marcy's English class, suddenly nothing in Marcy's life will be
the same.
The Contract 	Derek Jeter
As a young boy, Derek Jeter dreams of being the shortstop for
the New York Yankees. He even imagines himself in the World
Series. So when Derek is chosen for the Little League Tigers,
he hopes to play shortstop. But on the day of the assignments,
Derek Starts at second base. Still, he tries his best while he
wishes and dreams of that shortstop spot. And to help him stay
focused on school, his parents make him a contract: keep up
the grades or no baseball. Derek makes sure he always plays
his best game—on and off the baseball field!
Diary of a
Wimpy Kid
series
Jeff Kinney
Things aren't going well for Greg Heffley.
He's been thrust into a new school where undersize weaklings
share the corridors with kids who are taller, meaner and already
shaving.
With his friend Rowley, Greg's desperate to prove his new
maturity, which only going up a grade can bring.
But when Rowley's star starts to rise, will Greg be able to reach
the same heights of popularity as Rowley?
Firegirl 	Tony Abbott
A middle school boy's life is changed when Jessica, a girl
disfigured by burns, starts attending his Catholic school while
receiving treatment at a local hospital.
Flipped Wendelin Van
Draanen
Willow Chance is a twelve-year-old genius, obsessed with
nature and diagnosing medical conditions, who finds it
comforting to count by 7s. It has never been easy for her to
connect with anyone other than her adoptive parents, but that
hasn’t kept her from leading a quietly happy life . . . until now.
Realistic Fiction
🎯 	Challenging Read
😀 	Recommended for the Reluctant Reader

-- 4 of 12 --

Independent Reading
Grade 6
Front Desk 	Kelly Yang
Front Desk is a middle grade book written by Kelly Yang and
published by Scholastic in 2018. Yang's debut book is about
ten-year-old Mia Tang and her family who, after a couple years
struggling financially, are hired to manage a motel.
Full Court
Press Mike Lupica A three-ring circus ensues when a woman plays in the NBA for
the first time-and for the worst team in the league.
Ghost Jason
Reynolds
Aspiring to be the fastest sprinter on his elite middle school's
track team, gifted runner Ghost finds his goal challenged by a
tragic past with a violent father.
Ground Zero 	Alan Gratz
September 11, 2001, New York City: Brandon is visiting his dad
at work, on the 107th floor of the World Trade Center. Out of
nowhere, an airplane slams into the tower, creating a fiery
nightmare of terror and confusion. And Brandon is in the middle
of it all. Can he survive -- and escape?
Heroes 	Alan Gratz
Best friends Frank and Stanley have it good. Their dads–one a
Navy pilot, the other a flight crew chief–are stationed at Pearl
Harbor in Hawaii, where the air smells like pineapples, the clear
blue water sparkles in the sun, and dozens of US battleships,
cruisers, and aircraft carriers stand silent sentinel. World War II
is raging everywhere else, and it’s all anyone can talk about–
but so far, the United States has remained neutral.
Homecoming
🎯 Cynthia Voigt Abandoned by their mother, four children begin a search for a
home and an identity.
I am not Joey
Pigza
😀
Jack Gantos
Joey's father returns, calling himself Charles Heinz and
apologizing for his past bad behavior, and he swears that once
Joey and his mother change their names and help him fix up
the old diner he has bought, their lives will change for the
better.
Realistic Fiction
🎯 	Challenging Read
😀 	Recommended for the Reluctant Reader

-- 5 of 12 --

Independent Reading
Grade 6
Insignificant
Events in the
Life of a
Cactus
Dusti Bowling
Aven Green loves to tell people that she lost her arms in an
alligator wrestling match, or a wildfire in Tanzania, but the truth
is she was born without them. And when her parents take a job
running Stagecoach Pass, a rundown western theme park in
Arizona, Aven moves with them across the country knowing
that she’ll have to answer the question over and over again.
Jump Shot Tiki Barber &
Ronde Barber
The Barber brothers know their way around a football field—but
can they succeed on the basketball court? Find out in this slam
dunk with “lively basketball action and life lessons aplenty”
(Kirkus Reviews) from NFL superstars and bestselling authors
Tiki and Ronde Barber.
Keep it
Together,
Keiko Carter
Debbi Michiko
Florence
Seventh grade is supposed to be a game changer. And Keiko
thinks she's got it covered, especially with Audrey and Jenna by
her side to shop for a new look, pick out a prime lunch spot,
and even hit up that cute new bubble tea place after school.
Her trio is ready to tackle life as they always have...
together.But when Audrey decides they need boyfriends before
Fall Ball, it looks like things may be changing in all the wrong
ways.
Kira-Kira Cynthia
Kadohata
When Katie and her family move from a Japanese community
in Iowa to the Deep South of Georgia, it's Lynn who explains to
her why people stop them on the street to stare. And it's Lynn
who, with her special way of viewing the world, teaches Katie to
look beyond tomorrow. But when Lynn becomes desperately ill,
and the whole family begins to fall apart, it is up to Katie to find
a way to remind them all that there is always something
glittering -- kira-kira -- in the future.
Luminous in its persistence of love and hope, Kira-Kira is
Cynthia Kadohata's stunning debut in middle-grade fiction.
The Last Kids
on Earth Max Brallier The Simpsons meetsThe Walking Dead in this monstrously
funny post-apocalyptic graphic novel for middle-grade readers.
Last Shot John
Feinstein
As Tiki and Ronde count the days until the start of football
season, the basketball coach approaches them looking for new
recruits, and Tiki and Ronde sign on.
Realistic Fiction
🎯 	Challenging Read
😀 	Recommended for the Reluctant Reader

-- 6 of 12 --

Independent Reading
Grade 6
Loser
😀 Jerry Spinelli
Even though his classmates from first grade on have
considered him strange and a loser, Daniel Zinkoff's optimism
and exuberance and the support of his loving family do not
allow him to feel that way about himself.
Maniac Magee 	Jerry Spinelli
While Hidden Valley Junior High has always been a
powerhouse in football, the school has never done as well in
basketball. Ronde is a good passer, but he needs Tiki to get
free to sink his shots. Tiki doesn’t feel the inner confidence he
felt on the football field: it’s one thing to play in the driveway, but
it’s another to sink one on the court, when so much is on the
line. The brothers need a winning attitude—and they need to
bring everyone together to win. That is their only way to victory.
Can they do it?
Marley: A Dog
Like No Other John Grogan
Follows the life story of an exuberant Labrador retriever who
gets into perpetual trouble and experiences a range of inspiring
adventures. "With unconditional love and loyalty, he brings joy
to his family and teaches them what really matters in life."
Middle School,
The Worst
Years of My
Life
James
Patterson &
Chris
Tebbetts
Rafe Khatchadorian has enough problems at home without
throwing his first year of middle school into the mix. Luckily, he's
got an ace plan for the best year ever, if only he can pull it off:
With his best friend Leonardo the Silent awarding him points,
Rafe tries to break every rule in his school's oppressive Code of
Conduct. Chewing gum in class-5,000 points! Running in the
hallway-10,000 points! Pulling the fire alarm-50,000 points! But
when Rafe's game starts to catch up with him, he'll have to
decide if winning is all that matters, or if he's finally ready to
face the rules, bullies, and truths he's been avoiding.
Miracle on 49th
Street Mike Lupica After her mother's death, twelve-year-old Molly learns that her
father is a basketball star for the Boston Celtics.
Mother-
Daughter Book
Club
Heather
Vogel
Frederick
When the mothers of four sixth-grade girls with very different
personalities pressure them into forming a book club, they find,
as they read and discuss "Little Women," that they have much
more in common than they could have imagined.
Realistic Fiction
🎯 	Challenging Read
😀 	Recommended for the Reluctant Reader

-- 7 of 12 --

Independent Reading
Grade 6
Mr. Terupt Falls
Again Rob Buyea
It's a roller coaster of a year as Mr. Terupt helps his students be
the best they can be—and enlists their help to pull off an extra-
special project. But will there be a happy ending for all?
This title is the second book in a series.
Out of My Mind Sharon
Draper
Considered by many to be mentally retarded, a brilliant,
impatient fifth-grader with cerebral palsy discovers a
technological device that will allow her to speak for the first
time.
Prisoner
B-3087 Alan Gratz
From Alan Gratz, the #1 New York Times bestselling author of
Refugee, comes this wrenching novel about one boy's struggle
to survive ten concentration camps during the Holocaust.
Based on the inspiring true life story of Jack Gruener.
Red Zone 	Mike Lupica
A sequel to Bump and Run finds New York Hawks co-owner
Jack Molloy taking a break abroad after his notorious brothers
sell their half of the team to a fractious businessman, who
quickly alienates everyone affiliated with the team and causes
the departure of the general manager before Molloy enlists
outside help.
Refugee 	Alan Gratz
Although separated by continents and decades, Josef, a Jewish
boy living in 1930s Nazi Germany; Isabel, a Cuban girl trying to
escape the riots and unrest plaguing her country in 1994; and
Mahmoud, a Syrian boy in 2015 whose homeland is torn apart
by violence and destruction, embark on harrowing journeys in
search of refuge, discovering shocking connections that tie their
stories together.
Song for a
Whale Lynne Kelly
Full of heart and poignancy, this affecting story by sign
language interpreter Lynne Kelly shows how a little
determination can make big waves.
Realistic Fiction
🎯 	Challenging Read
😀 	Recommended for the Reluctant Reader

-- 8 of 12 --

Independent Reading
Grade 6
Spy School 	Stuart Gibbs
Ben Ripley may only be in middle school, but he’s already
pegged his dream job: CIA or bust. Unfortunately for him, his
personality doesn’t exactly scream “secret agent.” In fact, Ben
is so awkward, he can barely get to school and back without a
mishap. Because of his innate nerdiness, Ben is not surprised
when he is recruited for a magnet school with a focus on
science—but he’s entirely shocked to discover that the school
is actually a front for a junior CIA academy. Could the CIA really
want him?
Other books in this series include:
Spy Camp
Spy Ski School
STAT series Amar’e
Stoudemire
Eleven-year-old Amar'e Stoudemire has a lot going on. He
loves to go skateboarding in the park. He takes his school work
very seriously. He helps out with his dad's landscaping
company. And he likes to play basketball with his best friends-
but just for fun.
When a group of older kids start disrespecting his boys on their
neighborhood basketball court, there is only one solution.
Amar'e must step in and use his athletic ability and intelligence
to save the day.
Titles in the series include:
STAT: Home Court
STAT: Double Time
STAT: Slam Dunk
The Season of
Styx Malone
Kekla
Magoon
Meet Caleb and Bobby Gene, two brothers embarking on a
madcap, heartwarming, one-thing-leads-to-another adventure
in which friendships are forged, loyalties are tested . . . and
miracles just might happen.
Trapped in
Hitler’s Web
Marsha
Forchuk
Skrypuch
In the grip of World War II, Maria has realized that her Nazi-
occupied Ukrainian town is no longer safe. Though she and her
family might survive, her friend Nathan, who is Jewish, is in
grave danger. So Maria and Nathan flee -- into the heart of
Hitler's Reich in Austria.
The
Vanderbeekers
of 141st Street
Karina Yan
Glaser
Told that they will have to move out of their Harlem brownstone
just after Christmas, the five Vanderbeeker children, ages four
to twelve, decide to change their reclusive landlord's mind.
Realistic Fiction
🎯 	Challenging Read
😀 	Recommended for the Reluctant Reader

-- 9 of 12 --

Independent Reading
Grade 6
The War that
Saved My Life
Kimberly
Brubaker
Bradley
Ten-year-old Ada has never left her one-room apartment. Her
mother is too humiliated by Ada’s twisted foot to let her outside.
So when her little brother Jamie is shipped out of London to
escape the war, Ada doesn’t waste a minute—she sneaks out
to join him.
The Wedding
Planner’s
Daughter
Coleen
Paratore
Willa, a romantic girl who wants a father, tries to find a husband
for her mother, Cape Cod's most popular wedding planner.
The Wild Robot 	Peter Brown
When robot Roz opens her eyes for the first time, she discovers
that she is alone on a remote, wild island. Why is she there?
Where did she come from? And, most important, how will she
survive in her harsh surroundings?
Wishtree Katherine
Applegate
Red is an oak tree who is many rings old. Red is the
neighborhood "wishtree"—people write their wishes on pieces
of cloth and tie them to Red's branches. Along with a crow
named Bongo and other animals who seek refuge in Red's
hollows, this wishtree watches over the neighborhood.
Wonder 	R. J. Palacio
Ten-year-old Auggie Pullman, who was born with extreme facial
abnormalities and was not expected to survive, goes from being
home-schooled to entering fifth grade at a private middle school
in Manhattan, which entails enduring the taunting and fear of
his classmates as he struggles to be seen as just another
student.
Realistic Fiction
Science Fiction
Ender’s Game
🎯
Orson Scott
Card
Child hero Ender Wiggin must fight a desperate battle against a
deadly alien race if mankind is to survive.
🎯 	Challenging Read
😀 	Recommended for the Reluctant Reader

-- 10 of 12 --

Independent Reading
Grade 6
Ender's
Shadow
🎯
Orson Scott
Card
Follows the life of Ender Wiggin's comrade Bean, from his
escape from the mean streets of Rotterdam, to his student
days at the Battle School, and to his role as Ender's right hand
ally, strategist, and friend in the epic struggle to save Earth
from alien invaders.
The Maze
Runner
James
Dashner
Sixteen-year-old Thomas wakes up with no memory in the
middle of a maze and realizes he must work with the
community in which he finds himself if he is to escape.
Any book in
The Mysterious
Benedict
Society Series
🎯
Trenton Lee
Stewart
The Mysterious Benedict Society: After passing a series of
mind-bending tests, four children are selected for a secret
mission that requires them to go undercover at the Learning
Institute for the Very Enlightened, where the only rule is that
there are no rules. Other titles in the series include: The
Mysterious Benedict Society and the Perilous Journey, The
Mysterious Benedict Society and the Prisoner's Dilemma.
Things Not
Seen
Andrew
Clements
When fifteen-year-old Bobby wakes up and finds himself
invisible, he and his parents and his new blind friend Alicia try
to find out what caused his condition and how to reverse it.
(Audiobook available)
A Wrinkle in
Time
🎯
Madeleine
L’Engle
Meg Murry and her friends become involved with unearthly
strangers and a search for Meg's father, who has disappeared
while engaged in secret work for the government. (Audiobook
available)
Science Fiction
Fantasy
Any book in
The Baseball
Card
Adventure
Series
😀
Dan Gutman
Honus & Me: Joey, who loves baseball but is not very good at
it, finds a valuable 1909 Honus Wagner card and travels back
in time to meet Honus. Other titles in the series include: Jackie
& Me, Babe & Me, Shoeless Joe & Me, Mickey & Me, Abner &
Me, Satch & Me, Jim & Me, Roberto & Me, Ray & Me, Ted &
Me.
🎯 	Challenging Read
😀 	Recommended for the Reluctant Reader

-- 11 of 12 --

Independent Reading
Grade 6
The BFG
😀 Roald Dahl
Snatched from her orphanage by a BFG (Big Friendly Giant),
who spends his life blowing happy dreams to children, Sophie
concocts with him a plan to save the world from nine other
man-gobbling cannybull giants.
Ella Enchanted Gail Carson
Levine
In this novel based on the story of Cinderella, Ella struggles
against the childhood curse that forces her to obey any order
given to her.
Fairest Gail Carson
Levine
In a land where beauty and singing are valued above all else,
Aza eventually comes to reconcile her unconventional
appearance and her magical voice, and learns to accept
herself for who she truly is.
Nevermoor Jessica
Townsend
Morrigan Crow is cursed. Born on an unlucky day, she is
blamed for all local misfortunes, from hailstorms to heart
attacks - and, worst of all, the curse means that Morrigan is
doomed to die at midnight on Eventide.
Red Pyramid 	Rick Riordan
After their father's research experiment unleashes the Egyptian
god Set, Carter and Sadie Kane embark on a dangerous
journey across the globe--a quest which brings them ever
closer to the truth about their family, and their links to a secret
order that has existed since the time of the pharaohs.
Any book in
The Series of
Unfortunate
Events series
Lemony
Snicket
The Bad Beginning: The Baudelaire children, Violet, Klaus and
baby Sunny, are exceedingly unlucky. Their parents have been
killed, and they are forced to go and stay with their Uncle Olaf.
It soon turns out that Olaf has evil plans for the children. Other
titles in the series include: The Reptile Room, The Wide
Window, The Miserable Mill, The Austere Academy,
Any book in
The Spiderwick
Chronicles
Tony
DiTerlizzi and
Holly Black
The Field Guide: When the Grace children go to stay at their
Great Aunt Lucinda's worn Victorian house, they discover a
field guide to fairies and other creatures and begin to have
some unusual experiences. Other titles in the series include:
The Seeing Stone, Lucinda’s Secret, The Ironwood Tree.
Fantasy
🎯 	Challenging Read
😀 	Recommended for the Reluctant Reader

-- 12 of 12 --

