Independent Reading
Grade 7
Students entering grade 7 are expected to read at least two independent reading books. Students are
encouraged to choose from the suggested titles on the pages that follow. In the event that a student
wishes to make an alternate selection, we ask that families take an active role in helping students select
an appropriate independent reading title.
For other suggestions, please check out YALSA’s book awards and book lists for a selection of award-
winning titles.
Note: Students will discuss their independent reading selections in September—There is no written
requirement.
🎯 Challenging Read
😀 Recommended for the Reluctant Reader
Please Note:
Many books on our independent reading list are
available as eBooks through FollettShelf or the Sora
app. Titles with an active hyperlink are available as
eBooks. Students should use their school username
and password to access the site.
Contact bbarthelmes@byramhills.org with any
questions about using eBooks.
Quantities are limited

-- 1 of 25 --

Independent Reading
Grade 7
Classics
American
Indian Stories,
Legends, and
Other Writings
Zitkala-¨Sa
Zitkala-Sa wrestled with the conflicting influences of American
Indian and white culture throughout her life. Raised on a Sioux
reservation, she was educated at boarding schools that
enforced assimilation and was witness to major events in white-
Indian relations in the late 1800s and early 1900s. Tapping her
troubled personal history, Zitkala-Sa created stories that
illuminate the tragedy and complexity of the American Indian
experience. In evocative prose laced with political savvy, she
forces new thinking about the perceptions, assumptions, and
customs of both Sioux and white cultures and raises issues of
assimilation, identity, and race relations that remain compelling
today.
Little Women
🎯
Louisa May
Alcott
Set in New England during the Civil War, it chronicles the lives
and loves of Jo, Meg, Amy, and Beth, four sisters who must rely
on each other for strength in the face of tragedies both large
and small, after their father leaves for battle.
Old Yeller 	Fred Gipson
With the help of a yellow stray dog named Old Yeller, fourteen-
year-old Travis tries to meet his responsibilites on the family's
Texas hill country farm in the 1860s.
The Secret
Garden
🎯
Frances
Hodgson
Burnett
After the death of her parents, 9-year-old Mary is brought back
from India to live in Misselthwaite Manor. Wandering in the
grounds, she finds a buried key & unlocks a door in the garden
wall to find a garden that has been hidden away for many
years.
War of the
Worlds
🎯
H.G. Wells
H.G. Wells's hugely influential book tracks the exploits of a
writer who struggles to survive an alien invasion of Victorian
England. After seeing the monstrous Martians firsthand, the
narrator attempts to evade their destructive mechanized
vehicles and must stay on the run to avoid detection. As he
meets other desperate humans, he becomes increasingly
pessimistic about any chance of survival. The novel stands as a
major milestone in science-fiction literature, inspiring legions of
subsequent writers and an endless array of hostile-alien
scenarios.
🎯 Challenging Read
😀 Recommended for the Reluctant Reader

-- 2 of 25 --

Independent Reading
Grade 7
Where the Red
Fern Grows Wilson Rawls
Billy has long dreamt of owning not one, but two, dogs. So
when he’s finally able to save up enough money for two pups to
call his own—Old Dan and Little Ann—he’s ecstatic. It doesn’t
matter that times are tough; together they’ll roam the hills of the
Ozarks.
The Wind in
the Willows
🎯
Kenneth
Grahame
The escapades of four animal friends—Toad, Mole, Rat, and
Badger--who live in the English countryside, as they picnic on
the riverbank, indulge in Toad's latest fad, and get lost in Wild
Wood.
Classics
Fairytale
Half Upon a
Time Trilogy James Riley
Jack lives in a fantasy world. Really. He's the son of the
infamous Jack who stole the magic beans from the giant, and
he's working hard to restore his family's reputation. He finds the
perfect opportunity when a “princess” lands in front of him,
apparently from the land of Punk, as her Punk Princess
sweatshirt implies. May is from our world, and she’s utterly
confused to find herself in the midst of the fairy tale characters
she has read about. But Jack and May have more in common
than they realize—and together, they embark on a hilarious and
wild adventure in this highly accessible, modern middle grade
fantasy novel.
The Land of
Stories Chris Coffer
The Land of Stories tells the tale of twins Alex and Conner.
Through the mysterious powers of a cherished book of stories,
they leave their world behind and find themselves in a foreign
land full of wonder and magic where they come face-to-face
with fairy tale characters they grew up reading about.
The Lunar
Chronicles
series
Marissa
Meyer
Cinder: As plague ravages the overcrowded Earth observed by
a ruthless lunar people, Cinder, a gifted mechanic and cyborg,
becomes involved with handsome Prince Kai and must uncover
secrets about her past in order to protect the world in this
futuristic take on the Cinderella story. Other titles in this series
include: Scarlet, Cress, Winter, Fairest
🎯 Challenging Read
😀 Recommended for the Reluctant Reader

-- 3 of 25 --

Independent Reading
Grade 7
The Princess
Bride
🎯
William
Goldman
Follow a boy reading an abridged (and very exciting!) version of
a fairytale he was read as a kid.
A Tale Dark
and Grimm
😀
Adam Gidwitz Hansel and Gretel navigate through Grimm’s fairy-tales in the
hopes to survive.
Fairytale
Fantasy
Beowulf: A
New Telling
😀
Robert Nye Follow the viking Beowulf as he hunts down the creature
Grendel in a reader friendly version of this classic epic.
The Hobbit
🎯
J. R. R.
Tolkien
Prequel to Lord of the Rings, this tells of a hobbit who leaves
the comforts of his home and embarks on many adventures.
Inheritance
series
Christopher
Paolini
Eragon: Farm boy Eragon takes a journey where he becomes
a dragon rider and hopes to stop the evil that is in his land.
Other titles in this series include:
Eldest
Inheritance
Brisingr
The Kane
Chronicles
series
Rick Riordan
The Red Pyramid: From the creator of Percy Jackson, this
series follows Carter into the world of Egyptian mythology.
Other titles in this series include:
The Throne of Fire
The Serpent’s Shadow.
🎯 Challenging Read
😀 Recommended for the Reluctant Reader

-- 4 of 25 --

Independent Reading
Grade 7
The Mostly
True Story of
Jack
Kelly Barnhill A boy goes to a boring town, only to find out it is full of magic
and mystery.
Percy Jackson
and the
Olympians
series
Rick Riordan
(Any book in the series EXCEPT The Lightning Thief). Follow
the descendant of Poseidon in the modern world as he must
navigate the creatures and gods of Greek mythology. Other
titles in the series include:
The Sea of Monsters
The Titan’s Curse
The Battle of the Labyrinth
The Last Olympian
Red Queen
Series
🎯
Victoria
Aveyard
Mare Barrow's world is divided by blood—those with common,
Red blood serve the Silver-blooded elite, who are gifted with
superhuman abilities. Mare is a Red, scraping by as a thief in a
poor, rural village, until a twist of fate throws her in front of the
Silver court. Before the king, princes, and all the nobles, she
discovers she has an ability of her own.
Savvy series 	Ingrid Law
A vibrant new voice . . . a modern classic.
For generations, the Beaumont family has harbored a magical
secret. They each possess a “savvy”—a special supernatural
power that strikes when they turn thirteen. Grandpa Bomba
moves mountains, her older brothers create hurricanes and
spark electricity . . . and now it’s the eve of Mibs’s big day.
Other titles in the series include:
Scumble
Switch
School for
Good and Evil
series
Soman
Chainani
This year, best friends Sophie and Agatha are about to
discover where all the lost children go: the fabled School for
Good & Evil, where ordinary boys and girls are trained to be
fairy tale heroes and villains. Other titles in the series include:
A World Without Princes
The Last Ever After
Fantasy
🎯 Challenging Read
😀 Recommended for the Reluctant Reader

-- 5 of 25 --

Independent Reading
Grade 7
Fiction
Al Capone
Does My Shirts
😀
Gennifer
Choldenko
Moose’s father is stationed as a guard and electrician on
Alcatraz Island where Moose must take care of his autistic
sister and deal with the scheming prison warden’s daughter.
Award(s): 2007 California Young Reader Medal, Newbery
Honor
American Road
Trip
Patrick
Flores-Scott
With a strong family, the best friend a guy could ask for, and a
budding romance with the girl of his dreams, life shows
promise for Teodoro “T” Avila. But he takes some hard hits the
summer before senior year when his nearly perfect brother,
Manny, returns from a tour in Iraq with a devastating case of
PTSD. In a desperate effort to save Manny from himself and
pull their family back together, T’s fiery sister, Xochitl,
hoodwinks her brothers into a cathartic road trip.
Black Boys
Dreaming Khalil Barnes
Pushing up against the hardship of current events, these new
authors decided to create a collection of imaginative stories
that share messages they believe the world needs to hear
today about resilience, self-expression, and staying true to your
dreams. In this collection, you will meet Kobe, a teenage
basketball player grappling with the death of his role model;
Zim, a sword-wielding orphan on a quest to save his
grandmother's life; Ava, a cyborg girl who just wants to be
normal; and Brandon, a boy struggling to choose between his
passion and his family.
The
Downstairs Girl Stacey Lee
By day, seventeen-year-old Jo Kuan works as a lady's maid for
the cruel daughter of one of the wealthiest men in Atlanta. But
by night, Jo moonlights as the pseudonymous author of a
newspaper advice column for the genteel Southern lady, Dear
Miss Sweetie. When her column becomes wildly popular, she
uses the power of the pen to address some of society's ills, but
she's not prepared for the backlash that follows when her
column challenges fixed ideas about race and gender. While
her opponents clamor to uncover the secret identity of Miss
Sweetie, a mysterious letter sets Jo off on a search for her own
past and the parents who abandoned her as a baby. But when
her efforts put her in the crosshairs of Atlanta's most notorious
criminal, Jo must decide whether she, a girl used to living in the
shadows, is ready to step into the light. With prose that is witty,
insightful, and at times heartbreaking, Stacey Lee masterfully
crafts an extraordinary social drama set in the New South.
🎯 Challenging Read
😀 Recommended for the Reluctant Reader

-- 6 of 25 --

Independent Reading
Grade 7
Elsewhere Gabrielle
Zevin
Is it possible to grow up while getting younger?
Welcome to Elsewhere. It is warm, with a breeze, and the
beaches are marvelous. It's quiet and peaceful. You can't get
sick or any older. Curious to see new paintings by Picasso?
Swing by one of Elsewhere's museums. Need to talk to
someone about your problems? Stop by Marilyn Monroe's
psychiatric practice.
The Evolution
of Calpurnia
Tate
Jacqueline
Kelly
Calpurnia Virginia Tate is eleven years old in 1899 when she
wonders why the yellow grasshoppers in her Texas backyard
are so much bigger than the green ones.With a little help from
her notoriously cantankerous grandfather, an avid naturalist,
she figures out that the green grasshoppers are easier to see
against the yellow grass, so they are eaten before they can get
any larger. As Callie explores the natural world around her, she
develops a close relationship with her grandfather, navigates
the dangers of living with six brothers, and comes up against
just what it means to be a girl at the turn of the century.
Faith, Hope,
and Ivy June
Phyllis
Reynolds
Naylor
Two girls, from two very different upbringings, participate in a
school exchange and start to find out that they are more alike
than different.
The Fourteenth
Goldfish
😀
Jennifer Holm
Eleven-year-old Ellie has never liked change. She misses fifth
grade. She misses her old best friend. She even misses her
dearly departed goldfish. Then one day a strange boy shows
up. He’s bossy. He’s cranky. And weirdly enough . . . he looks a
lot like Ellie’s grandfather, a scientist who’s always been slightly
obsessed with immortality. Could this pimply boy really be
Grandpa Melvin? Has he finally found the secret to eternal
youth?
Full of Beans
😀 Jennifer Holm
Grown-ups lie. That’s one truth Beans knows for sure. He and
his gang know how to spot a whopper a mile away, because
they are the savviest bunch of barefoot conchs (that means
“locals”) in all of Key West. Not that Beans really minds; it’s
1934, the middle of the Great Depression. With no jobs on the
island, and no money anywhere, who can really blame the
grown-ups for telling a few tales? Besides, Beans isn’t
anyone’s fool. In fact, he has plans. Big plans. And the
consequences might surprise even Beans himself.
Fiction
🎯 Challenging Read
😀 Recommended for the Reluctant Reader

-- 7 of 25 --

Independent Reading
Grade 7
Ginny Moon Benjamin
Ludwig
After years in foster care, Ginny is in her fourth forever family,
finally with parents who will love her. Everyone tells her that
she should feel happy, but she has never stopped crafting her
Big Secret Plan of Escape. Because something happened, a
long time ago – something that only Ginny knows – and
nothing will stop her going back to put it right…
A Good Kind of
Trouble
Lisa Moore
Ramee
Twelve-year-old Shayla is allergic to trouble. All she wants to
do is to follow the rules. (Oh, and she’d also like to make it
through seventh grade with her best friendships intact, learn to
run track, and have a cute boy see past her giant forehead.)
But in junior high, it’s like all the rules have changed. Now
she’s suddenly questioning who her best friends are and some
people at school are saying she’s not black enough. Wait,
what?
The Graveyard
Book Neil Gaiman
When a baby escapes a murderer intent on killing the entire
family, who would have thought it would find safety and
security in the local graveyard?
Brought up by the resident ghosts, ghouls and spectres, Bod
has an eccentric childhood learning about life from the dead.
But for Bod there is also the danger of the murderer still looking
for him - after all, he is the last remaining member of the family.
A stunningly original novel deftly constructed over eight
chapters, featuring every second year of Bod's life, from
babyhood to adolescence. Will Bod survive to be a man?
Guys Write for
Guys Read
Collection
Jon Scieszka
What is a typical guy moment, anyhow? Daniel Pinkwater
remembers the disappointment of meeting his Lone Star
Ranger hero up close and personal. Gordon Korman relishes
the goofy ultra violence of the old Looney Tunes cartoons.
Stephen King realizes that having your two hundred- pound
babysitter fart on your five-year-old head prepares you for any
literary criticism. And that's just a sampling from Guys Write for
Guys Read, a fast-paced, high energy collection of short works:
stories, essays, columns, cartoons, anecdotes, and artwork by
today's most popular writers and illustrators.
Fiction
🎯 Challenging Read
😀 Recommended for the Reluctant Reader

-- 8 of 25 --

Independent Reading
Grade 7
Hour of the
Bees
Lindsay
Eagar
While her friends are spending their summers having pool
parties and sleepovers, twelve-year-old Carolina — Carol — is
spending hers in the middle of the New Mexico desert, helping
her parents move the grandfather she’s never met into a home
for people with dementia. At first, Carol avoids prickly Grandpa
Serge. But as the summer wears on and the heat bears down,
Carol finds herself drawn to him, fascinated by the crazy stories
he tells her about a healing tree, a green-glass lake, and the
bees that will bring back the rain and end a hundred years of
drought. As the thin line between magic and reality starts to
blur, Carol must decide for herself what is possible — and what
it means to be true to her roots. Readers who dream that
there’s something more out there will be enchanted by this
captivating novel of family, renewal, and discovering the
wonder of the world.
Let’s Go
Swimming on
Doomsday
🎯
Natalie C.
Anderson
When Abdi's family is kidnapped, he's forced to do the
unthinkable: become a child soldier with the ruthless jihadi
group Al Shabaab. In order to save the lives of those he loves,
and earn their freedom, Abdi agrees to be embedded as a spy
within the militia's ranks and to send dispatches on their plans
to the Americans. The jihadists trust Abdi immediately because
his older brother, Dahir, is already one of them, protégé to
General Idris, aka the Butcher. If Abdi's duplicity is discovered,
he will be killed.
Look Both
Ways
Jason
Reynolds
From National Book Award finalist and #1 New York Times
bestselling author Jason Reynolds comes a novel told in ten
blocks, showing all the different directions kids’ walks home
can take.
This story was going to begin like all the best stories. With a
school bus falling from the sky. But no one saw it happen. They
were all too busy...
Mr. Terupt
series Rob Buyea
Seven students are about to have their lives changed by one
amazing teacher in this school story sequel filled with unique
characters every reader can relate to. It’s the start of a new
year at Snow Hill School, and seven students find themselves
thrown together in Mr. Terupt’s fifth grade class.
Fiction
🎯 Challenging Read
😀 Recommended for the Reluctant Reader

-- 9 of 25 --

Independent Reading
Grade 7
Opposite of
Always
🎯
Justin A.
Reynolds
Debut author Justin A. Reynolds delivers a hilarious and
heartfelt novel about the choices we make, the people we
choose, and the moments that make a life worth reliving.
Perfect for fans of Nicola Yoon and John Green.
When Jack and Kate meet at a party, bonding until sunrise over
their mutual love of Froot Loops and their favorite flicks, Jack
knows he’s falling—hard. Soon she’s meeting his best friends,
Jillian and Franny, and Kate wins them over as easily as she
did Jack.
Penny from
Heaven
😀
Jennifer Holm
School’s out for summer, and Penny and her cousin Frankie
have big plans to eat lots of butter pecan ice cream, swim at
the local pool, and cheer on their favorite baseball team—the
Brooklyn Dodgers! But sometimes things don’t go according to
plan. Penny’s mom doesn’t want her to swim because she’s
afraid Penny will get polio. Frankie is constantly getting into
trouble, and Penny feels caught between the two sides of her
family. But even if the summer doesn’t exactly start as
planned . . . things can work out in the most unexpected ways!
The Perfect
Score Rob Buyea
No one likes or wants to take the statewide assessment tests.
Not the students in Mrs. Woods's sixth-grade class, not even
their teacher. It's not like the kids don't already have things to
worry about. . . .
Pictures of
Hollis Woods
😀
Patricia Reilly
Giff
A young foster child finds solace in photography. Award(s):
Newbery Honor Award
The Running
Dream
Wendelin Van
Draanen
Jessica thinks her life is over when she loses a leg in a car
accident. She's not comforted by the news that she'll be able to
walk with the help of a prosthetic leg. Who cares about walking
when you live to run?
The Seventh
Most Important
Thing
Shelley
Pearsall
Arthur T. Owens grabbed a brick and hurled it at the trash
picker. Arthur had his reasons, and the brick hit the Junk Man
in the arm, not the head. But none of that matters to the judge--
he is ready to send Arthur to juvie forever. Amazingly, it's the
Junk Man himself who offers an alternative: 120 hours of
community service . . . working for him.
Fiction
🎯 Challenging Read
😀 Recommended for the Reluctant Reader

-- 10 of 25 --

Independent Reading
Grade 7
Shooting Kabul 	N. H. Senzai
For generations, the Beaumont family has harbored a magical
secret. They each possess a “savvy”—a special supernatural
power that strikes when they turn thirteen. Grandpa Bomba
moves mountains, her older brothers create hurricanes and
spark electricity . . . and now it’s the eve of Mibs’s big day.
Small Town
Pride
😀
Phil Stamper
From acclaimed author Phil Stamper (The Gravity of Us and As
Far as You’ll Take Me) comes a poignant coming-of-age,
contemporary middle grade debut novel about finding your
place, using your voice, and the true meaning of pride. Perfect
for fans of Rick by Alex Gino and The Best at It by Maulik
Pancholy.
So B. It
😀 Sarah Weeks
Heidi tries to find out about her past and the the meaning of the
word “Soof,” a word her disabled mother often says. Award(s):
2007 Rebecca Caudill Young Reader’s Book Award, 2007
Summer of
Lost and
Found
Rebecca
Behrens
From the author of When Audrey Met Alice comes a sweeping
middle grade novel about a city girl forced to spend her
summer in North Carolina, where she becomes involved in a
centuries-old mystery, turning her once boring vacation into an
adventure she never could have imagined.
The Thing
About Luck
Cynthia
Kadohata
Nell Dare expected to spend her summer vacation hanging out
with her friends in New York City. That is, until her botanist
mom dragged her all the way to Roanoke Island for a research
trip. To make matters worse, her father suddenly and
mysteriously leaves town, leaving no explanation or clues as to
where he went—or why.
The Third
Mushroom
😀
Jennifer Holm
Ellie's grandpa Melvin is a world-renowned scientist . . . in the
body of a fourteen-year-old boy. His feet stink, and he eats
everything in the refrigerator--and Ellie is so happy to have him
around. Grandpa may not exactly fit in at middle school, but he
certainly keeps things interesting. When he and Ellie team up
for the county science fair, no one realizes just how
groundbreaking their experiment will be. The formula for
eternal youth may be within their reach! And when Ellie's cat,
Jonas Salk, gets sick, the stakes become even higher. But is
the key to eternal life really the key to happiness? Sometimes
even the most careful experiments yield unexpected--and
wonderful--results.
Fiction
🎯 Challenging Read
😀 Recommended for the Reluctant Reader

-- 11 of 25 --

Independent Reading
Grade 7
Turtle in
Paradise
😀
Jennifer Holm
Turtle’s smart and tough and has seen enough of the world not
to expect a Hollywood ending. After all, it's 1935 and jobs and
money and sometimes even dreams are scarce. So when
Turtle's mama gets a job housekeeping for a lady who doesn't
like kids, Turtle says goodbye without a tear and heads off to
Key West, Florida to live with relatives she's never met.
The
Unteachables
😀
Gordon
Korman
The Unteachables never thought they’d find a teacher who had
a worse attitude than they did. And Mr. Kermit never thought he
would actually care about teaching again. Over the course of a
school year, though, room 117 will experience mayhem,
destruction—and maybe even a shot at redemption.
A Year Without
Autumn Liz Kessler
If you could see into the future - would you look?
Jenni Green doesn't have a choice. On her way to visit her best
friend, Autumn, Jenni suddenly finds she's been transported
exactly one year forward in time.
Now she discovers that in the year that's gone by, tragedy has
struck and her friendship with Autumn will never be the same
again. But what caused the tragedy? How did Jenni skip a
year? And can she find her way back to the past to try to
change what lies ahead?
Wait Till Helen
Comes (A
Ghost Story)
May Downing
Hahn
Twelve-year-old Molly and her ten-year-old brother, Michael,
have never liked their seven-year-old stepsister, Heather. Ever
since their parents got married, she's made Molly and
Michael's life miserable. Now their parents have moved them
all to the country to live in a house that used to be a church,
with a cemetery in the backyard. If that's not bad enough,
Heather starts talking to a ghost named Helen and warning
Molly and Michael that Helen is coming for them. Molly feels
certain Heather is in some kind of danger, but every time she
tries to help, Heather twists things around to get her into
trouble. It seems as if things can't get any worse.
But they do—when Helen comes.
Fiction
🎯 Challenging Read
😀 Recommended for the Reluctant Reader

-- 12 of 25 --

Independent Reading
Grade 7
Graphic Novels
Amulet series
😀 Kazu Kibuishi
The Stonekeeper: A girl discovers a necklace that takes her to a
different world where she must save her mother and restore
order to the land. Other titles in this series include: The
Stonekeeper’s Curse, The Cloud Searchers, The Last Council,
Prince of the Elves, Escape from Lucien.
Awkward
series
Svetlana
Chmakova
Flawed protagonist Peppi is fantastically imperfect in this
middle school graphic novel. She is the new girl at Berrybrook
Middle School and is having a hard time fitting in because of
her struggles with social anxiety—Julie Zimmerman, Brooklyn
Public Library.
The Baby-
Sitters Club
series
😀
Raina
Telgemeier
The hit series returns to charm and inspire another generation
of baby-sitters! The first three classic BSC books are back,
along with a brand-new prequel, The Summer Before. It all
began with a great idea ... and the inspiring original story of the
Baby-sitters Club is back! Kristy Thomas's brilliant business
plan gets off to a great start with the help of Claudia Kishi (vice-
president), Mary Anne Spier (secretary), and Stacey McGill
(treasurer). Other titles in this series include: BBC #2: Claudia
and the Phantom Phone Calls, BBC #3: The Truth about
Stacey.
Be Prepared 	Vera Brosgal
In Be Prepared, all Vera wants to do is fit in—but that’s not easy
for a Russian girl in the suburbs. Her friends live in fancy
houses and their parents can afford to send them to the best
summer camps. Vera’s single mother can’t afford that sort of
luxury, but there's one summer camp in her price range—
Russian summer camp.
Drama
😀
Raina
Telgemeier
Telgemeier relives her experiences and crushes she had while
she was working on a school play.
🎯 Challenging Read
😀 Recommended for the Reluctant Reader

-- 13 of 25 --

Independent Reading
Grade 7
The Graveyard
Book Neil Gaiman
When a baby escapes a murderer intent on killing the entire
family, who would have thought it would find safety and security
in the local graveyard?
Brought up by the resident ghosts, ghouls and spectres, Bod
has an eccentric childhood learning about life from the dead.
But for Bod there is also the danger of the murderer still looking
for him - after all, he is the last remaining member of the family.
A stunningly original novel deftly constructed over eight
chapters, featuring every second year of Bod's life, from
babyhood to adolescence. Will Bod survive to be a man?
Real Friends
Shannon
Hale and
LeUyen
Pham
Newbury Honor author Shannon Hale and New York Times
bestselling illustrator LeUyen Pham join forces in this graphic
memoir about how hard it is to find your real friends—and why
it’s worth the journey.
Sisters
😀
Raina
Telgemeier
Telgemeier talks about her relationship with her younger sister
while on a car trip to a family reunion
Smile
😀
Raina
Telgemeier
Telgemeier relives her experiences surrounding a freak dental
incident that helped to make her who she is. Award(s): 2010
Boston Globe - Horn Book Honor for non-fiction, 2011 Eisner
Award for Best Publication for Teens, 2011 Association for
Library Service to Children Notable children’s book for Middle
Readers, 2013 Young Readers Choice Award, 2013 Rebecca
Caudill Reader’s Book Award, 2014 Nevada Young Reader
Award
They Called Us
Enemy
😀
George Takei,
Justin
Eisinger,
Steven Scott,
and Harmony
Becker
A stunning graphic memoir recounting actor/author/activist
George Takei's childhood imprisoned within American
concentration camps during World War II. Experience the
forces that shaped an American icon -- and America itself -- in
this gripping tale of courage, country, loyalty, and love.
Graphic Novels
🎯 Challenging Read
😀 Recommended for the Reluctant Reader

-- 14 of 25 --

Independent Reading
Grade 7
Poetry
Brown Girl
Dreaming
Jacqueline
Woodson
Raised in South Carolina and New York, Woodson always felt
halfway home in each place. In vivid poems, she shares what it
was like to grow up as an African American in the 1960s and
1970s, living with the remnants of Jim Crow and her growing
awareness of the Civil Rights movement.
The Crossover
series
😀
Kwame
Alexander
"With a bolt of lightning on my kicks . . .The court is SIZZLING.
My sweat is DRIZZLING. Stop all that quivering. Cuz tonight I'm
delivering," announces dread-locked, 12-year old Josh Bell. He
and his twin brother Jordan are awesome on the court. But
Josh has more than basketball in his blood, he's got mad beats,
too, that tell his family's story in verse, in this fast and furious
middle grade novel of family and brotherhood from Kwame
Alexander (He Said, She Said 2013).
Mascot
Charles
Waters &
Traci Sorell
What if a school’s mascot is seen as racist, but not by
everyone? In this compelling middle-grade novel in verse, two
best-selling BIPOC authors tackle this hot-button issue.
The Red Pencil Andrea Davis
Pinkney
Written in verse, follow Amira, a young girl living in Sudan, as
she finds her voice while journeying towards a new life in a
refugee camp.
Starfish 	Lisa Fipps
Ever since Ellie wore a whale swimsuit and made a big splash
at her fifth birthday party, she's been bullied about her weight.
To cope, she tries to live by the Fat Girl Rules—like "no making
waves," "avoid eating in public," and "don't move so fast that
your body jiggles." And she's found her safe space—her
swimming pool—where she feels weightless in a fat-obsessed
world.
Why I Wake Up
Early
🎯
Mary Oliver
This volume includes poems on crickets, toads, trout lilies,
black snakes, goldenrod, bears, greeting the morning, watching
the deer and, finally, lingering in happiness. Each poem is
imbued with the extraordinary perceptions of a poet who
considers the everyday in our lives and the natural world
around us and finds a multitude of reasons to marvel.
🎯 Challenging Read
😀 Recommended for the Reluctant Reader

-- 15 of 25 --

Independent Reading
Grade 7
Historical Fiction
April Morning 	Howard Fast
Experience the battle of Lexington and the events that lead up
to it through the eyes of Adam, a young boy growing up during
the Revolutionary War.
Assassin
😀 Anna Myers
Read about the moments that lead up to Lincoln’s
assassination from the fictional point of view of a 14 year old
girl and the man who would become a murderer.
King of
Shadows
Susan
Cooper
Travel through time with Nat Field when he comes down with a
fever and goes 400 years in the past to the time of
Shakespeare. Award(s): Finalist for the Carnegie Medal,
Finalist for the Guardian Children’s Fiction Prize
Let the Circle
Be Unbroken
😀
Mildred Taylor
Sequel to Roll of Thunder, follow the Logan family through the
Depression Era. Award(s): 1982 Coretta Scott King Author
Award
The Notorious
Benedict
Arnold
Steve
Sheinkin
Steve Sheinkin’s accessible biography, The Notorious Benedict
Arnold, introduces young readers to the real Arnold: reckless,
heroic, and driven. Packed with first-person accounts,
astonishing American Revolution battle scenes, and surprising
twists, this is a gripping and true adventure tale from history.
Revolution is
Not a Dinner
Party
Ying Chang
Compestine
Nine-year-old Ling has a very happy life. Her parents are both
dedicated surgeons at the best hospital in Wuhan, and her
father teaches her English as they listen to Voice of America
every evening on the radio. But when one of Mao's political
officers moves into a room in their apartment, Ling begins to
witness the gradual disintegration of her world. In an
atmosphere of increasing mistrust and hatred, Ling fears for the
safety of her neighbors, and soon, for herself and her family.
For the next four years, Ling will suffer more horrors than many
people face in a lifetime. Will she be able to grow and blossom
under the oppressive rule of Chairman Mao? Or will fighting to
survive destroy her spirit—and end her life?
🎯 Challenging Read
😀 Recommended for the Reluctant Reader

-- 16 of 25 --

Independent Reading
Grade 7
Undefeated Steve
Sheinkin
Undefeated: Jim Thorpe and the Carlisle Indian School Football
Team is an astonishing underdog sports story—and more. It’s
an unflinching look at the U.S. government’s violent persecution
of Native Americans and the school that was designed to erase
Indian cultures. Expertly told by three-time National Book Award
finalist Steve Sheinkin, it’s the story of a group of young men
who came together at that school, the overwhelming obstacles
they faced both on and off the field, and their absolute refusal to
accept defeat.
Historical Fiction
Mystery
And Then
There Were
None
🎯
Agatha
Christie
Ten strangers, each with secrets, are staying at a mansion on a
secluded island, when each one is being killed off.
The Greystone
Secrets series
Margaret
Peterson
Haddix
New York Times bestselling author Margaret Peterson Haddix
takes readers on a thrilling adventure filled with mysteries and
plot twists aplenty in this absorbing series about family and
friendships. Perfect for fans of A Wrinkle in Time and The City
of Ember!
The Mysterious
Benedict
Society series
Trenton Lee
Stewart
The Mysterious Benedict Society: After passing a series of
mind-bending tests, four children are selected for a secret
mission that requires them to go undercover at the Learning
Institute for the Very Enlightened, where the only rule is that
there are no rules. Other titles in the series include:
The Mysterious Benedict Society and the Perilous Journey
The Mysterious Benedict Society and the Prisoner’s Dilemma
The Extraordinary Education of Nicholas Benedict.
🎯 Challenging Read
😀 Recommended for the Reluctant Reader

-- 17 of 25 --

Independent Reading
Grade 7
Shadow
Jumper Series J. M. Forster
The truth is out there somewhere . . . but how far will Jack jump
to find it? Jack Phillips's allergy to sunshine confines him to the
shadows, leaving him lonely and at risk of life-threatening burns
every time he steps into the light. Shadow jumping on the
rooftops at dusk makes him feel alive. And free. But Jack's
condition is suddenly worse than ever and only his missing
scientist dad can save him. As Jack and his new friend, Beth,
begin their frantic search and delve into his dad's past for clues,
they have no idea what they are about to uncover. Shocking
rumours and dark secrets bombard them at every turn. Shadow
Jumping takes courage. But when it comes to the truth, will
Jack be brave enough to face it?
The Westing
Game Ellen Raskin Strangers meet to hear the reading of a will, only to find out one
of them is a murderer. Award(s): 1979 Newbery Medal
Mystery
Nonfiction
The Boys in
the Boat
(Young
Readers
Adaptation)
Daniel James
Brown
Out of the depths of the Depression comes an irresistible story
about beating the odds and finding hope in the most desperate
of times—the improbable, intimate account of how nine
working-class boys from the American West showed the world
at the 1936 Olympics in Berlin what true grit really meant.
The Boys of
Winter
🎯
Wayne Coffey Follow the 1980’s Olympic hockey team on the quest for the
gold.
The Boy Who
Harnessed the
Wind (Young
Readers
Edition)
William
Kampwamba
and Bryan
Mealer
When a terrible drought struck William Kamkwamba's tiny
village in Malawi, his family lost all of the season's crops,
leaving them with nothing to eat and nothing to sell. William
began to explore science books in his village library, looking for
a solution. There, he came up with the idea that would change
his family's life forever: he could build a windmill. Made out of
scrap metal and old bicycle parts, William's windmill brought
electricity to his home and helped his family pump the water
they needed to farm the land.
🎯 Challenging Read
😀 Recommended for the Reluctant Reader

-- 18 of 25 --

Independent Reading
Grade 7
Change the
Recipe Jose Andres
José Andrés is a chef, an entrepreneur, an author, a television
host, and a tireless humanitarian leader across the globe. A
Michelin-starred chef with more than forty restaurants, José is
also the founder of World Central Kitchen, a nonprofit dedicated
to feeding the hungry in the wake of natural and man-made
disasters. His lifetime of experience—from kitchens to conflict
zones—has given him a wealth of stories and teachable
moments that are funny, touching, and insightful, all animated
by the belief that food can bring us closer together and the
conviction that each of us can change the world for the better.
Chasing
Lincoln’s Killer
James L.
Swanson
Young Adult version of Manhunt. Learn about what went on
when Lincoln was assassinated.
China’s Son 	Da Chen
Because his grandfather was once a landlord, Da Chen's
formerly privileged family were considered outcasts during
China's Cultural Revolution. Chen recalls his mistreatment by
neighbors and teachers, his gang experiences, and his
determination to attend college.
The Circuit
and/or
Breaking
Through
😀
Francisco
Jimenez
Both books follow a migrant worker’s family’s struggle in both
the United States and Mexico. Award(s): Pura Belpré Award.
(Audiobook available)
Code Girls
(Young
Readers
Edition)
Liza Mundy
More than ten thousand women served as codebreakers during
World War II, recruited by the U.S. Army and Navy. While their
brothers and boyfriends took up arms, these women moved to
the nation’s capital to learn the top secret art of code breaking.
Through their work, the “code girls” helped save countless lives
and were vital in ending the war. But due to the top secret
nature of their accomplishments, these women have never
been able to talk about their story—until now.
Diary of a
Young
Naturalist
Dara
McAnulty
From sixteen-year-old Dara McAnulty, a globally renowned
figure in the youth climate activist movement, comes a memoir
about loving the natural world and fighting to save it.
Diary of a Young Naturalist chronicles the turning of a year in
Dara’s Northern Ireland home patch. Beginning in
spring―when “the sparrows dig the moss from the guttering
and the air is as puffed out as the robin’s chest―these diary
entries about his connection to wildlife and the way he sees the
world are vivid, evocative, and moving.
Nonfiction
🎯 Challenging Read
😀 Recommended for the Reluctant Reader

-- 19 of 25 --

Independent Reading
Grade 7
The Four
Agreements
Don Miguel
Ruiz
In The Four Agreements, bestselling author don Miguel Ruiz
reveals the source of self-limiting beliefs that rob us of joy and
create needless suffering. Based on ancient Toltec wisdom, The
Four Agreements offer a powerful code of conduct that can
rapidly transform our lives to a new experience of freedom, true
happiness, and love.
Grayson 	Lynne Cox
Grayson is Lynne Cox’s first book since Swimming to Antarctica
(“Riveting”—Sports Illustrated; “Pitch-perfect”—Outside). In it
she tells the story of a miraculous ocean encounter that
happened to her when she was seventeen and in training for a
big swim (she had already swum the English Channel, twice,
and the Catalina Channel).
Humble Pi:
When Math
Goes Wrong in
the Real World
🎯
Matt Parker
Exploring and explaining a litany of glitches, near misses, and
mathematical mishaps involving the internet, big data,
elections, street signs, lotteries, the Roman Empire, and an
Olympic team, Matt Parker uncovers the bizarre ways math
trips us up, and what this reveals about its essential place in
our world. Getting it wrong has never been more fun.
I Have Lived a
Thousand
Years
Livia Bitton-
Jackson The author tells of her experience during the Holocaust.
I am Malala
(Young
Reader’s
Edition)
Malala
Yousafzai
The young adult version of 'I am Malala' that tells the tale of the
brave young woman who stood up against the Taliban for equal
education. (Alternate eBook link)
Normal
Magdalena &
Nathaniel
Newman
Normal. Who is to say what this word means? For Magda
Newman, it was a goal. She wanted her son Nathaniel to be
able to play on the playground, swim at the beach, enjoy the
moments his friends took for granted. But Nathaniel’s severe
Treacher Collins syndrome—a craniofacial condition—meant
that other concerns came first. Could he eat without the aid of a
gastrointestinal tube? Could he hear? Would he ever be able to
breathe effortlessly? But Nathaniel looks at “normal” from a
completely different perspective.
Nonfiction
🎯 Challenging Read
😀 Recommended for the Reluctant Reader

-- 20 of 25 --

Independent Reading
Grade 7
The President
Has Been Shot
James L.
Swanson
Follow the dramatic events around President Kennedy’s
assassination told for the Young Adult reader.
Quiet Power-
The Secret
Strength of
Introverted
Kids
Susan Cain
The highly anticipated follow-up to the sensational bestseller
Quiet - empowering introverted children, teens and young
adults Susan Cain sparked a worldwide conversation with
Quiet: The Power of Introverts in a World that Can't Stop
Talking. She inspired millions of people, and permanently
changed the way we see introverts - and the way introverts see
themselves. Now she takes the Quiet Revolution to a younger
audience. Childhood, adolescence and your early twenties are
times wrought with insecurity and self-doubt. Your search for
your place in the world can seem daunting. Focusing on the
strengths and challenges of being introverted, Quiet Power is
full of examples from school, family life and friendship, applying
the breakthrough discoveries of Quiet to readers that so badly
need them. This insightful, accessible and empowering book is
eye-opening to extroverts and introverts alike. Unlock your
hidden superpower and give yourself the tools to make a mark -
in your own quiet way.
Radium Girls
(Young
Readers
Edition)
Kate Moore
Amid the excitement of the early twentieth century, hundreds of
young women spend their days hard at work painting watch
dials with glow-in-the-dark radium paint. The painters consider
themselves lucky--until they start suffering from a mysterious
illness. As the corporations try to cover up a shocking secret,
these shining girls suddenly find themselves at the center of a
deadly scandal.
Shipwreck at
the Bottom of
the World
Jennifer
Armstrong
Learn about Shakleton and the endurance that his crew had
when they became trapped in the South Pole.
Stamped:
Racism,
Antiracism,
and You
Jason
Reynolds and
Ibram X.
Kendi
The construct of race has always been used to gain and keep
power, to create dynamics that separate and silence. This
remarkable reimagining of Dr. Ibram X. Kendi's National Book
Award-winning Stamped from the Beginning reveals the history
of racist ideas in America, and inspires hope for an antiracist
future. It takes you on a race journey from then to now, shows
you why we feel how we feel, and why the poison of racism
lingers. It also proves that while racist ideas have always been
easy to fabricate and distribute, they can also be discredited.
Nonfiction
🎯 Challenging Read
😀 Recommended for the Reluctant Reader

-- 21 of 25 --

Independent Reading
Grade 7
Throw Like A
Girl
Jennie Finch
& Ann Killion
The evidence is overwhelming: sports help girls grow into
strong women. Both scientific studies and anecdotal evidence
confirm that athletic girls not only grow up to be healthier; they
learn teamwork, gain inner confidence, and grow into society's
leaders. Sports help preteen and teenage girls make the right
choices in a society that is sending them incredibly mixed
messages about who they are supposed to be. Yet no one is
speaking directly to these girls. Jennie fills the role of girlfriend,
big sister, team captain, and mentor. A smart, credible, and
accomplished voice from an athlete who is strong and feminine,
fiercely competitive, and fashionably cool, Jennie is someone
young women will listen to and take to heart. Jennie's message:
Believe in yourself. Go for it, girls.
Unbroken (The
Young Adult
Adaptation)
Laura
Hillenbrand
In this captivating young adult edition of her award-winning #1
New York Times bestseller, Laura Hillenbrand tells the story of a
man’s breathtaking odyssey and the courage, cunning, and
fortitude he found to endure and overcome. Lavishly illustrated
with more than one hundred photographs and featuring an
exclusive interview with Zamperini, Unbroken will introduce a
new generation to one of history’s most thrilling survival epics.
Nonfiction
Science Fiction
Ender’s Game Orson Scott
Card
In order to develop a secure defense against a hostile alien
race's next attack, government agencies breed child geniuses
and train them as soldiers. A brilliant young boy, Andrew
"Ender" Wiggin lives with his kind but distant parents, his
sadistic brother Peter, and the person he loves more than
anyone else, his sister Valentine. Peter and Valentine were
candidates for the soldier-training program but didn't make the
cut—young Ender is the Wiggin drafted to the orbiting Battle
School for rigorous military training.
Ender's Game is the winner of the 1985 Nebula Award for Best
Novel and the 1986 Hugo Award for Best Novel.
The First State
of Being
Erin Entrada
Kelly
When twelve-year-old Michael Rosario meets a mysterious boy
from the future, his life is changed forever. From bestselling
author Erin Entrada Kelly, winner of the Newbery Medal for
Hello, Universe and a Newbery Honor for We Dream of Space,
this novel explores themes of family, friendship, trust, and
forgiveness.
🎯 Challenging Read
😀 Recommended for the Reluctant Reader

-- 22 of 25 --

Independent Reading
Grade 7
The
Hitchhiker’s
Guide to the
Galaxy series
Douglas
Adams
Right before Earth is destroyed, Arthur is saved and is now
going throughout the galaxy with his friend Ford.
Giver series 	Lois Lowry
Continue the story of The Giver in the rest of the popular series.
Other titles in this series include:
Gathering Blue
Messenger
Son.
Gone series 	Michael Grant
All the adults mysteriously disappear, and some of the children
left behind start to get super powers and scary creatures begin
to lurk. Other titles in this series include: Hunger, Lies, Plague,
Fear, Light.
The Last Book
in the Universe
😀
Rodman
Philbrick
Spaz tries to save his sick foster sister and is befriended by the
one man who holds onto the past, books.
The Last
Bookstore on
Earth
🎯
Lily Braun-
Arnold
Two teen girls fall in love and fight for survival in an abandoned
bookstore weeks before another cataclysmic storm threatens to
bring about the end of the world in this unforgettable YA debut.
The Legend
series Marie Lu
What was once the western United States is now home to the
Republic, a nation perpetually at war with its neighbors. Born
into an elite family in one of the Republic's wealthiest districts,
fifteen-year-old June is a prodigy being groomed for success in
the Republic's highest military circles. Born into the slums,
fifteen-year-old Day is the country's most wanted criminal. But
his motives may not be as malicious as they seem. Other titles
in this series include:
Prodigy
Champion
Science Fiction
🎯 Challenging Read
😀 Recommended for the Reluctant Reader

-- 23 of 25 --

Independent Reading
Grade 7
The Maze
Runner series
James
Dashner
Sixteen-year-old Thomas wakes up with no memory in the
middle of a bizarre and terrible maze. The others who are there
already call themselves Gladers and, like Thomas, don't know
why or how they came to be there, or what's happened to the
world outside. Thomas soon realizes he must work with the
Gladers if he is to escape. Other titles in this series include:
The Scorch Trials
The Death Cure
The Kill Order
Scythe series
🎯
Neal
Shusterman
A world with no hunger, no disease, no war, no misery:
humanity has conquered all those things, and has even
conquered death. Now Scythes are the only ones who can end
life—and they are commanded to do so, in order to keep the
size of the population under control.
Citra and Rowan are chosen to apprentice to a scythe—a role
that neither wants. These teens must master the “art” of taking
life, knowing that the consequence of failure could mean losing
their own.
Scythe is the first novel of a thrilling new series by National
Book Award–winning author Neal Shusterman in which Citra
and Rowan learn that a perfect world comes only with a heavy
price.
The
Supernaturalist Eoin Colfer
Protagonist, Cosmo escapes his deadly orphanage with the
help of the Supernaturalists, rogue children with special
powers.
Truesight
series David Stahler In a world where everyone is born blind, a young boy Jacob can
see. Other titles in this series include: The Seer, Otherspace.
Science Fiction
🎯 Challenging Read
😀 Recommended for the Reluctant Reader

-- 24 of 25 --

Independent Reading
Grade 7
Sports Fiction
Baseball Great
😀 Tim Green Josh just wants to play baseball, but when his team starts to get
noticed, he gets some unwanted attention and help.
The Big Time
😀 Tim Green Troy is celebrating a promising football career when he is
reunited with someone who claims to be his father.
Heat 	Mike Lupica Orphaned Mike has to prove he is 12 years old so he can pitch
in the Little League World Series.
The Home
Team Series Mike Lupica
Jack Callahan is the star of his baseball team and seventh
grade is supposed to be his year. Undefeated season. Records
shattered. Little League World Series. The works. That is, until
he up and quits.
Books in the series include The Only Game, The Extra Yard,
Point Guard, and Team Players.
Miracle on 49th
Street Mike Lupica Celtics star is at the top of his game when he gets a visit from a
girl, his daughter.
The Sports
Beat series
John
Feinstein
Last Shot: A Final Four Mystery: Reporters Steven and Susan
must uncover the mysteries that surround popular sports
players in the mainstream sports events that they are covering.
(Audiobook available)
Other titles in this series include:
Vanishing Act: Mystery at the U.S. Open
Cover-Up: Mystery at the Super Bowl
Change-Up: Mystery at the World Series
The Rivalry: Mystery at the Army-Navy Game
Rush for the Gold: Mystery at the Olympics
🎯 Challenging Read
😀 Recommended for the Reluctant Reader

-- 25 of 25 --

